[music]
>> Bloomberg Audio Studios. Podcasts,
radio, news.
>> [music]
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the Odd Lots podcast. I'm Joe
Weisenthal. And I'm Tracy Alloway.
Tracy, we're recording this April 7th,
10:30 in the morning. Of course, by the
time this comes out, we have no idea
what will be going on with the war in
Iran. But, one reason we may be in the
war in Iran in the first place is
because of, frankly, how smooth the
operation went to remove Maduro and
Trump found a sort of political partner
he can work with in the form of uh Delcy
Rodríguez in Venezuela. Yes, he seemed
to enjoy getting access to a lot of oil
from Venezuela. And I guess the thinking
is perhaps he tried to repeat that in
Iran with so far varying degrees of
success.
Yeah, maybe no success at all. And
perhaps generous. But, like this idea
that it's like, "Okay, remove Maduro and
here is someone who was part of the
government." It's like, "Okay, you know
what? We're going to be friends with the
Americans now. We're going to play
ball." Certainly don't want to, you
know, the next in charge didn't want to
end up with the same person in uh
didn't want to end up in the same
position. I almost worried I'd slip and
say the same prison. Um though that
would have also worked. But, didn't want
to end up in the same position as
Maduro. And so, okay, there's this sort
of partnership. But, it also occurs to
me like, even setting this aside,
doesn't it feel like we're in some sort
of I don't know if golden age is the
right word, but there's so many iconic
Latin American leaders right now. So,
obviously you have Delcy and then you
have Sheinbaum and you have Javier Milei
and you have Lula and of course Bukele.
And so, we sort of like are in a moment
where there are several very
high-profile LatAm leaders, all of which
seem to be carving out their own lane in
one way or another. Well, the other
reason that Latin America is really
interesting at the moment is because the
Trump administration has basically said
that after they're done with Iran in
whatever way they're envisioning, Cuba
is sort of next in their sights, right?
And we know that Cuba has been
struggling because of high oil prices. I
think we touched on it a little bit when
we did some of our Venezuela episodes.
>> Yeah. But, there's definitely a lot to
talk about in terms of that region and
what's going on with America and the war
in Iran. Totally. So, is LatAm going to
be Bukele-fied or there's going to be
sort of these extreme harsh like sort of
illiberal crackdowns on crime? Is it
going to be Delcy-fied or there going to
be a lot of pliant leaders? Is there
going to be a sort of populist left wave
if uh Sheinbaum is more successful or
Lula's ongoing success? Is it going to
be libertarian and if uh things work out
in Milei? Very interesting uh questions.
Anyway, I'm very excited to say we have
a perfect guest, someone who I've been
reading for a long time. He has a great
Substack called the Latin America Risk
Report that I really find to be
essential reading.
He is the founder of a company called
Hexagon, non-resident fellow at the
Stimson Center. We are going to be
speaking with James Bosworth, goes by
Boz, and uh knows a lot about LatAm
politics. So, uh Boz, thank you so much
for uh coming on Odd Lots. Thank you for
having me here. I'm a big fan. Thank you
so much. What do you tell us I've become
a really big fan of your newsletter and
you have a pretty wide and deep
understanding of LatAm. But, what what
do you tell us a little bit about your
background? I started a blog in 2004.
It's what people did in the mid-2000s.
So,
The golden age of blogging.
>> Exactly. It's sort of coming back now
with Substack. It's exciting. So, I
started a blog in 2004 about Latin
American politics and I've been writing
ever since, now 22 years. I migrated to
Substack, I think back in 2018.
And really the newsletter is the main
focus of my world right now. I publish
almost every day for subscribers and
that's where I've come to focus. I
studied abroad in Chile in college and
I've lived in Nicaragua, Mexico, and
Colombia and I've traveled to the entire
region except for Venezuela and Cuba.
For some reason, I can't make it to
those countries. One day. What does it
mean to actually be a Latin America
expert? Because this is one of the
things I struggle with. Whenever we do
and we don't do them that often, but
when we do these Latin American
episodes, it's very tempting to talk
about the region as like this monolith.
And I wonder, is there an actual through
line that you can identify through all
these different countries or what does
it actually mean to say you are an
expert on this particular very large
region? Yeah, no, I I cover the whole
region from Mexico to Argentina and it
is hard because every country has its
own story, its own niche, its own
issues, its own accent. And to that end,
it can be difficult to deal with the
region as a whole. One of the things
I've seen just in the last now 14 months
is this sudden shift by the United
States. The United States has never
mattered more for Latin American
politics domestically. I mean, the
United States has always been the sort
of regional hegemon that has
overshadowed the region. But, Latin
America was often ignored by the United
States. And all of a sudden we have a
Trump administration that has made the
Western Hemisphere its focus. And you
have this with the Shield of the
Americas conference he did. You have
this with the map that Pete Hegseth
published last week showing Great North
America going all the way down to
Colombia and Venezuela. This sudden
focus where the Trump administration is
trying to find a through line has
suddenly dropped everybody who has been
a Latin America expert into the
spotlight that we've never seen before.
I mean, we were always the backwaters as
[laughter] everyone dealt with the
Middle East or dealt with Asia. And now
we have a Trump administration that
actually really does care except when
they get distracted by Iran. Am I wrong
in my sense that setting aside the fact
that, okay, the US is maybe pivoting
more towards its literal backyard,
although apparently not. There are a lot
of like iconic LatAm leaders right now
and each seem to have a lane. And what's
interesting is, you know, you hear over
time it's like, "Oh, there's like going
to be a pink wave in Latin America or
blue wave, whatever." There are really
many and they all seem quite distinct to
me and they all seem like serious like
political powerhouses within their
countries. I think we have seen an
interesting wave of leaders. And you
referenced there the pink tide, right?
Which which occurred in the 2000s. You
had Hugo Chávez and Lula da Silva and a
whole wave of left-wing sort of leaders.
Some of them democratic, some of them
autocratic. And you then get a shift
towards the center and towards the right
and then back towards the left and now
we're back towards sort of a pivot to
the right, but it's a pendulum. It goes
back and forth over time. And the thing
with the pink tide in the 2000s was
there was a clear divide between Hugo
Chávez and Lula da Silva and the the
autocrats and the democrats. And today
we have divides within these right-wing
leaders. I've called it the orange
shift, right? The leaders who have
aligned themselves with Trump over time.
And you have this, you know, Bukele is a
security populist. You have Milei who's
more libertarian and focused on
austerity. You have a group of them who
are technocratic and and actually quite
good at what they're doing. Abinader in
Dominican Republic is doing an amazing
job. And you have a group that is sort
of populist and wacky in their own way.
And I think Jair Bolsonaro, the former
president of Brazil, his son Flavio is
now running for office. You know, it
sort of fits that mold where he, you
know, he tried to model himself very
much on Donald Trump and that sort of
right-wing populism that exists. And so,
you do get these even though there's a
shift to the right and there will be a
shift back to the left, it's a pendulum.
You do have a sense here that there's a
division within this group. They're not
all a monolith.
So, when the US went into Venezuela, how
did that end up I I guess affecting some
of these previous Trump alliances or
existing Trump alliances? How did
leaders actually react to that? They
were surprisingly supportive of the
operation. And actually Latin American
citizens, going to the Bloomberg Atlas
poll that was published, Latin American
citizens were relatively positive about
it as well. The thing is, nobody liked
Nicolás Maduro.
He had stolen the election in 2018. He
had stolen the election in 2024. He had
generally burned the entire left in
terms of their support for him over time
and the right had never liked him. So,
everyone was happy, both leaders and
citizens, to see Nicolás Maduro gone.
Delcy Rodríguez is hard for Latin
America to understand now because she
was around before Nicolás Maduro. She
she she was one of the five most
powerful leaders in Venezuela for the
decade prior to Maduro's removal. And
you know, she was always, I don't want
to say moderate, she's part of the
corrupted elite. She trafficked in
drugs. She stole billions of dollars.
She put people in prison. But, she is
more moderate compared to Nicolás Maduro
or Diosdado Cabello or some of the other
Chavistas who are out there. And she is
pragmatic. She's always been willing to
cut a deal with anybody. And she's cut
this deal with Trump to maintain power
in Venezuela in a way that sort of
defies what was the US policy
previously, which was attempting to get
to some sort of removal of the Chavistas
and democratization in Venezuela. And
so, I think leaders across the spectrum
are having a hard time
viewing how they should understand Delcy
Rodríguez. At the same time, they also
see an opportunity because if they know
if Delcy Rodríguez can cut a deal with
Trump, then anyone can cut a deal with
Trump. And so, Delcy Rodríguez has shown
the benefits of cutting a deal with
Trump and also what the costs are if you
defy him in terms of what happened to
Nicolás Maduro. And everyone having seen
that is now going to move forward
understanding that and trying to cut new
deals with Trump. I definitely want to
talk about these new deals with Trump or
the sort of ripple effects of this
action. But, I'm One thing that strikes
me as interesting about this and maybe a
novelty
is that
leaving Venezuela under the control of
Delcy does not strike me as like
probably what the Venezuelan diaspora
would have wanted, right? I imagine
going back there is sort of this clear
idea that's like, "No, we want to go
back to the pre-Chavez era. We want to
have something that looks more
democratic and liberal, etc." This seems
to be Trump's modus operandi, which is
like he doesn't like a lot of the same
people that they don't like and
whatever, but it does not seem
particularly important to him that it's
like, "Oh, they now quickly hold fair
elections and so forth." And this seems
like sort of a Is this a novelty or is
this sort of standard MO with respect to
US foreign policy in Latin America?
That's a great question because in some
ways it is the old MO of how the United
States operated, right? If you go back
to the 1950s, '60s, '70s, you know, the
Kirkpatrick doctrine in the 1980s, the
US was happy to have its friendly
dictators who they backed. And so, Trump
is sort of pushed back at times to
previous eras. You know, he's looked
back to the Teddy Roosevelt era and then
the Roosevelt corollary to the Monroe
doctrine. He has looked at, you know,
the '70s and '80s and US support for
various dictatorships as a positive
effort for US influence in the region.
It does strike back. To your question
about the Venezuelan diaspora,
this is not necessarily what they
wanted, right? They want a return to
democracy and there are people out there
waving their hands in the air and
furious at the Trump administration, but
most of them are pretty happy. And
they're pretty happy because they've
seen change in Venezuela, right? You
have new problems in Venezuela and new
problems are better than being stagnated
under the Maduro regime. And to that
end, you know, they understand that this
is a process and it's going to take
time. So, people are
holding out hope that there will be some
sort of transition. The question is how
long? And and I think this goes to a a
challenge with the Trump policies versus
the Delcy policies. Marco Rubio has laid
out a plan, which is stabilization,
recovery, democratization. But Delcy
Rodriguez has an unwritten plan, which
is stabilization, recovery,
consolidation of power. Those first two
steps are the same. It's just in the
third step they diverge and we don't
know which plan we're actually following
right now. We've following the one
towards democratization or the one
towards consolidation of power. The
Venezuelan diaspora is looking for how
to handle
this question and if they get to
democratization, that's where they're
happy, but they understand it's going to
be a process.
>> [music]
[music]
>> Okay, so if we fast forward to today,
April 7th, have things changed in terms
of the perception of the Trump
administration in Latin America given
the situation in Iran where higher oil
prices would be expected to push up
prices for a lot of Latin American
countries and again, I realize not
talking about a block of, you know,
completely similar countries. Some of
them are oil exporters, some of them are
importers.
Are things changing now? in Latin
America are changing. I don't think that
the average citizen points to the Trump
administration as the reason to blame
for prices increasing, but take Chile
for example. Jose Antonio Kast is the
new president in Chile and just came
into power a month ago. He's already
seen a drop of 15 points in approval
rating. He was sitting about 55% when he
was inaugurated. Today he's closer to
40% according to multiple polls and
that's points to the problem of rising
diesel prices in Chile and the fact that
he has refused to subsidize those fuel
costs. Across Latin America, rising
costs matter to the population. I mean,
they matter here. You you feel it. You
feel inflation in the United States, but
when you live in a poorer country, you
spend more a larger percentage of your
family's income on rent, transportation,
and food costs. And so, when you see
rising transportation costs and rising
food costs, all of a sudden people feel
the suffering more and so you're seeing
leaders across all of the political
spectrums face a challenge in terms of
politics. You're seeing Gustavo Petro in
Colombia who if there's a Colombian
election coming up in a few months, they
face a problem. Javier Milei's approval
ratings are down below 35%. I mean, all
of these leaders are facing problems.
They don't blame Trump for it
necessarily, but it's clearly partially
Trump's fault for having gone to war
with Iran and had the Strait of Hormuz
shut down.
It seems like a global phenomenon that
basically you get elected and then your
approval rating starts to plunge.
Sheinbaum's holding up well. Isn't
Mexico sort of the exception here and
isn't she still fairly popular like a
year or whatever after the election?
>> Yeah, there are a few leaders who are
holding up well. Two worth talking about
are Sheinbaum and Bukele. Okay, let's
talk about them. Let's let's start with
Sheinbaum. Claudia Sheinbaum is still
sitting somewhere in the mid-60s
according to approval.
>> She's extraordinary in like a modern
democracy. And Andres Manuel Lopez
Obrador, her predecessor, spent most of
his time in office well above 60%
approval as well. Part of it goes to the
economic support that she has provided
her political base and the Morena party
is built around a system of economic
support that looks a lot like the old
PRI in Mexico from decades in the past.
But she's also, you know, she's taken
the populism that AMLO, her predecessor,
had and moved it towards a technocratic
management in which you've actually seen
security improve inside of Mexico.
Despite all the images of violence the
day El Mencho was killed, security has
improved over the last year while she's
been in office. And, you know, the
economy is still meandering. The economy
is not growing strong, but the economy
in Mexico hasn't grown strong for 20
years. So, this isn't a new phenomenon
that she's facing.
And then what about the Bukele? You said
he's the other one whose popularity has
held up. Yeah, his his popularity is
probably in the '60s or '70s. Nayib
Bukele came into office and cut a deal
with the MS-13
to reduce the amount of violence in the
country. He's also implemented a mano
dura policy. It's led to the arrest of
2% of the adult population. He has
cracked down on his political opponents.
He sent the military into the Congress.
He has arrested civil society leaders,
arrested political opponents. But there
are places in San Salvador today that
you can walk that you could not have
walked 10 years ago. People are very
appreciative of the security
improvements in El Salvador and for that
reason Bukele's approval rating has held
up despite all of the potential
criticisms. Bukele does have a weak
spot. It's the same weak spot as
everybody. It's the economy. The economy
in El Salvador is not growing. He's not
getting the foreign direct investment
that you would think. For years people
said, "If you could only fix security,
then investment would flow into a
country like El Salvador." The security
is fixed under Bukele and investment's
not flowing. And part of it's that
Bukele did this via corrupt deals and a
mano dura policy. He hasn't done this
via rule of law. And if a leader can
arrest 2% of their adult population,
they also don't have to follow the
contracts that they sign. And private
businesses just don't trust Bukele to be
a good leader and as a place they should
invest. If we go back to Delcy for just
a second, one thing that it feels kind
of hard to ascertain as an outsider is
like is she actually aligned with Trump
or is she just very good at sort of
being strategic in her dealings with
him?
You know, she is a person willing to cut
deals with everybody. She In some ways
she's like an AI. She just agrees with
everybody when she talks [laughter] to
them.
And so, people for years prior to
Maduro's removal, there were oil
companies and Venezuelan debt holders
who would say that they had a source
inside the Venezuelan government. It was
always Delcy. And they'd be talking to
her and and and she'd be telling them
everything that they wanted to hear.
She's telling Trump everything he wants
to hear.
In some ways she must just be a
pragmatic politician and she's playing
the the odds correctly. And yet I have
to say she's aligned because no leader
has given Trump more. At this point,
Venezuelan oil is sold via US companies
and routed via US government bank
accounts. And then the US government
sends a monthly payment to Delcy
Rodriguez and her government. Uh the
fact that the US now controls
Venezuela's oil is a callback to
colonialism in some ways. It's it's a
shocking development. And so, you know,
she is aligned because she's going along
with the scheme and it's benefiting her
and she's clearly, you know, her
government is making money on this.
That's pretty extraordinary. I didn't
quite realize what the arrangement was.
Trump perhaps had this fantasy that Iran
would be as easy as Venezuela. Top guy
disappears suddenly, the next It's
clearly has not gone like that at all.
And what I'm curious about was like by
the end of the Maduro era regime, had
any sort of ideological
like the revolutionary ideological
impulse had it just sort of completely
given way in your view to the sort of
what, you know, what people would call a
corrupt gangster state such that there
was nothing left worth fighting for like
ideologically at that point? I mean,
nothing worth fighting ideologically,
but lots to fight for in terms of
resources.
>> Well, that's what I mean though, right?
But like I'm not an expert on Iran at
all, but I think there it seems like the
people we've talked to believe like,
"No, there are quite a number of people
seriously invested
in Iran's ideological project and the
post-revolutionary
like impulse and so forth." By this
point in the Maduro regime, is it all
just basically everyone sort of out
materially like trying to nurse their
personal spoils? There are far fewer
ideological
>> like real like socialists and like who
like were, you know,
>> There are very few of them at this
point. The people who used to consider
themselves left-wing Chavistas, many of
them voted against Nicolas Maduro in the
2024 election. If you look at the voting
results coming from the poorest
neighborhoods of Caracas, they still
voted for Edmundo González in 2024. Um
the people who used to be Chavistas
turned on Maduro because Maduro failed
because it was one of the biggest
economic collapses in history.
And, you know, people went hungry for
years due to lack of food. And so, there
are people who remain ideologically
left-wing, but they're not part of the
government anymore. And to the extent
that there are any of them in the
government, they're lower players. They
haven't played the political game to
move up the ranks. And so, it's
basically gangster versus gangster or an
alliance of various mafia groups within
the government. You know, Delcy
Rodríguez controlling one and
potentially right this moment the
strongest sphere of the groups, you
know, within this administration.
I want to go back to something you said
earlier on the orange drift in general
and the idea that like leaders don't
blame Trump for rising oil prices,
which, you know, I kind of get. I can't
imagine that it would be politically
beneficial to say something outright
that the spike in energy prices is due
to Trump, but for the general
population,
why don't they draw that connection
between Trump and a higher cost of
living?
For most of Latin America, despite what
I said earlier about the fact that US
politics has become critical for all of
Latin American politics,
if you're an average voter in Chile,
Brazil, Argentina, Colombia, Mexico, you
aren't thinking about the US every day.
You're thinking about your bread and
butter issues. And to that end, you
always blame all politics is local and
you blame your local politicians for
what is occurring. And so, I don't think
that people have necessarily made the
big narrative leap between what Trump is
doing, Trump's alliances with various
leaders in their countries, and the cost
of living going up. But they do blame
their own leaders for the cost of living
going up, whether or not it's their
fault. They get the blame. That's just
traditional politics in any country and
how it functions. We haven't really
talked about Brazil yet, but I'm looking
at a chart on the terminal and the
misery index, sort of a crude measure,
is just add the unemployment rate to the
inflation rate. The Brazilian misery
index is basically like at the lowest in
I think over 20 years. Inflation seems
very mild and the labor market is very
solid, probably counter to some of the
fears like, okay, the socialist is
coming back or the left-wing popu- I
don't know. How does Lula himself
characterize his ideology? Lula was
always a socialist, right? He
He was a union leader, you know, he
fought the dictatorship in the 1980s.
>> Yeah.
Things seem to be going very well there.
They are. And I mean, every time Lula
has been elected, markets have panicked.
If you go back to his original election
in 2002 and his re-election in 2006,
markets panic when Lula gets elected.
And if you had put an
investment down on the day Lula was
inaugurated in any of his three terms so
far, you made money.
Brazilian markets have done very well
again under Lula and he has defied
expectations every time, and yet the
Brazilian markets hate Lula da Silva and
they are convinced that he is the one
who is going to take down their
government. But as you said, inflation
is reasonable, employment is up, and
they just had their most secure year in
10 years in terms of public security and
the in the amount of crime and homicide.
He's had a very successful 11 and a half
years in office across three terms.
And yet, markets are convinced that this
time is different and, you know, if the
he gets re-elected this year,
something's going to go wrong. It just
seems unlikely. He's constantly defied
the expectations. So, there is that
elect- uh Flavio Bolsonaro's like how is
his political popularity? Are the polls
vindicating the strong economic
situation for him? At the moment, Flavio
Bolsonaro is gaining in the polls and
Lula is has seen a small drop in the
polls in recent months. But, you know,
part of this relates to various
scandals. It feels like every time Lula
comes up for election, there is some
sort of scandal. In this case, there's
what's called the Banco Master scandal,
but various corrupt officials got or
various officials were bribed by various
businesses. This has happened every time
Lula has faced a an election. And once
again, you know, he's going to have to
dig himself out of this hole. And yet,
as the expectations for Lula's
re-election have gone down, you look at
where Polymarket is, it's down today
versus 6 months ago. 6 months ago, I
thought Lula could be beat by a real
candidate. Lula has received the
election that he wants. He has a two-way
race between himself and Flavio
Bolsonaro. He couldn't ask for a better
opponent. And Lula has proven to be a
great politician in the past. So, this
is the election that he wants and I
think my my my belief is that he's much
more likely to be re-elected than not.
Wait, so Lula is like he he's sort of
starting to make some noises about
imperialist America or like colonial
ambitions on the part of the Trump
administration. Does that strategy land
at all domestically within like Brazil?
Lula is an old-school leftist. And to
that end, Lula is always going to
criticize the United States for various
colonial ambitions and how the United
States treats Latin America. He's done
this for his entire career.
It during
>> But now he might have a case. Just
[laughter] throwing that out there.
Well, part of it was Lula has criticized
Trump for years and then they went and
hugged it out at the UN late last year
and and they've had some phone calls and
they've gotten along better and now
they're not getting along as well
anymore.
The Brazilian population doesn't care,
right? I mean, in general, the old Cold
War narrative of how the left versus the
right function, it's not where people
are voting. One concern here is that the
Trump administration is targeting
Brazil's financial sector, right?
They've put tariffs on Brazil. There's
section 301 investigation on Pix, which
is one of the most innovative financial
transfer systems in the world that the
Brazil Central Bank runs. And 93% of
Brazilians use Pix. It's used for about
half of all financial transactions in
Brazil. And so, it's possible here that,
you know, they don't care about Trump's
colonial ambitions in Venezuela, but if
Trump hurts Brazil's economy by
attacking Pix or by putting tariffs on
certain issues, that will play well for
Lula and that could be a benefit for his
election. Across recent elections, a lot
of candidates have received a Trump
bump, right? And Trump endorsed the
us for the candidate in Honduras and he
ended up winning.
Brazil is the one country where it may
not work for Trump, where he actually
you may see an anti-Trump bump because
of the way that Trump is attacking
Brazil's economy. Brazilian voters are
going to feel that in their pocketbooks
and it's going to cause them to push
away from Flavio Bolsonaro. What is
Bolsonaro's Who's his base? Cuz I mean,
I'm looking at the Polymarket, it is
very close, 42 to 38% odds. So, it's
like kind of a coin flip. But like, what
is the the core base of the
Bolsonaristas?
So, they have a couple different bases,
but evangelicals are a core base as is
agribusiness. They also have a core
base, you know, Brazil like any large
country, Brazil is huge, right? Has
various geographic bases. Their base is
much more in the south of Brazil versus
Lula's long-term base has been in the
northeast of Brazil. [music]
>> [music]
[music]
>> You had a piece several months ago about
Bukelefication. And to what degree are
we seeing this being replicated? This
sort of extreme
strongman anti-crime. You mentioned that
the security situation in Mexico has
improved, but that's clearly a very
different model. It's like a very
different thing. To what degree is this
spreading? It's like people or
countries' willingness to like sort of
sacrifice democracy and other things for
a very meaningful change in the crime
situation. First off, lots of leaders
wish they were Nayib Bukele because
every leader wishes they had 60 or 70%
popularity, right? And so, and so, a lot
of political leaders have looked towards
Bukele and Bukele's security populism as
a model for how to run for office. And
it has succeeded, right? Daniel Noboa
was elected in Ecuador based on a
security populism message. We saw in
Costa Rica, President Fernández, who's
going to be inaugurated soon, won in
part on a security populism message. She
brought Bukele into the country and and
and there was an event with Bukele
during the campaign. And yet, El
Salvador is tiny. El Salvador is smaller
than the Mexican state of Chiapas. And
it's a very small population and it's
hard to replicate what Bukele did both
in terms of the huge number of arrests
as well as the deals that he cut with
the one very large gang in MS-13 in a
country like Ecuador where there's 22
different gangs and a much larger
population. And so, Daniel Noboa, we've
seen crime go up and we've seen Noboa's
popularity go down despite a security
populism effort, despite bringing US
special forces to help target the
cartels in Ecuador. It's not working.
And so, while it works as a campaign
strategy elsewhere, it is not worked in
terms of a security strategy wherever
it's been implemented by politicians. I
want to step back in history for a
second cuz you mentioned the Monroe
Doctrine earlier and Joe and I have
gotten into disagreements in our daily
newsletter, which everyone should
subscribe to, about whether or not Trump
corollary to the Monroe Doctrine, the
Don Roe Doctrine, actually exists. I
mean, I think he clearly has some
ambitions on the region, which happened
in full display since Venezuela and
might be
even more apparent if Cuba comes into
his sights next. But what's your take on
the Trump administration's like ultimate
ambitions towards this particular
region? There's a few points here. One
thing, if you look at how the Trump
administration functions, I've never
seen a US administration function in a
way where I'm doing the individual level
of analysis, where I'm having to pick
through what does Pete Hegseth think,
what does Marco Rubio think, what does
J.D. Vance think? I never during the
Biden administration had to ask, you
know, what Kamala Harris thought versus
versus what Secretary Blinken thought.
Like that was never an issue. And so,
having to pick through the the various
individual pieces of the Trump
administration and what each person
believes and what aligns them and where
their disagreements are is a fascinating
exercise that I did in Venezuela when I
looked at Delcy Rodríguez, Nicolás
Maduro, and Diosdado Cabello. I never
had to do this with the United States
until now.
which you know, the US is going to be a
partner for military force in fighting
the cartels, etc. Like this just might
not exist in two years like in in three
years or whatever the election is. And
so like to some extent as you say like
none of this is like real planning, is
it? No, it's very much it is on Trump's
whims on any given day plus whatever
what
>> it's the and it's like the this is the
part that other people say around the
world is like the entire world is
essentially trying to plan for the
future by guessing like what a few
hundred thousand people in Michigan and
Iowa and Wisconsin are going to vote one
year each year. But one of the big
differences between Latin America and
the rest of the world here is that you
have had this orange shift in Latin
America. You have this group of leaders
who have allied themselves with Trump
and formed a block or a coalition. They
all showed up in in Florida a few weeks
ago for the for the Shield of the
Americas conference that Trump put on
because they canceled the Summit of the
Americas conference that has gone on for
decades. And so these leaders have
aligned themselves, but this shift in
Latin America has a drop-dead date. It
it ends in January 2029 when Trump
leaves office and it's not clear what
replaces it when it goes away.
Well, okay, on that note, 2028, assuming
that Trump doesn't get a third term or
find some way to get a third term, what
happens to all of these alliances?
Well, I think we're already going to
start seeing that shift of the pendulum
again, right? Latin America has gone
back and forth from left to center to
right and back over and over again
across decades. And
Latin America is going to already be
shifting back by 2029, 2030. And and
we're going to see an election cycle
where where these leaders start losing
power, not because they are allied with
Trump or not allied with Trump, but
simply because that's how the political
pendulum plays and we are in a fairly
long-term anti-incumbent cycle both in
Latin America and in much of the world.
And so I don't expect these leaders to
last in either event, but it's not clear
what follows. I think it's really
important for US policy. If if Trump has
done one thing right, it's the focus on
the Western Hemisphere. I actually I've
always wanted to see a focus on the
Western Hemisphere and I would be really
excited to see a future US
administration play out what it looks
like to focus this much on the Western
Hemisphere, but do so with a more
benevolent take in terms of using the
military force a little bit less and
trying to you know, improve people's
lives a little bit more. Well, this is
the other thing I want to ask you cuz at
the very beginning of this conversation
you talked about how we're at this
moment where America actually seems to
matter for much of the Western
Hemisphere and that wasn't necessarily
the case for some time previously. Why
do you think that I guess retreat from
the region in some sense happened?
I think that for the United States,
Latin America just wasn't quite the same
priority and we were worried. I mean,
there was a global war on terror where
we found ourselves in the Middle East
and South Asia. And then there's this
pivot to Asia because we do see a rising
China. And to the extent that we focused
on Latin America in the 2000s and the
2010s, you know, across the 2000s
there's this whole issue of what's going
on with Al-Qaeda and Hezbollah in Latin
America. And then across the 2010s and
early 2020s, it's "Oh my gosh, China's
in Latin America and we really have to
But Latin America was always placed in
context of whatever the other
geopolitical issue of the moment was.
And it it was unfortunate. We should
have been focused more on Latin America
as a region, not as a competitor to
China or a source of potential
terrorism, but because the region
matters. No region in the world matters
more to US security and US prosperity
than the Western Hemisphere. Our
alliance with Mexico as well as Canada
is critical to the future of the world
and we need to make sure that we get the
USMCA negotiations right. Latin America
is connected to the United States via
populations, via culture and you know,
we should be trying to boost that over
time,
not withdrawing from Latin America. So
for for the for that reason, I think
it's incredibly important that whoever
comes next, you know, continues a focus
on Latin America, but pivots a bit in
terms of what the tone is. I'm glad you
brought up China cuz that's where I was
going to go next. I have not done a lot
of traveling throughout Latin America,
but
I did visit I was in Guatemala a couple
of years ago. My mother lives in
Guatemala and one of the things that I
noticed there are a lot of Chinese cars
on the road. Not many BYDs, but even the
electric ones, but some of the older
models and they're probably uh pretty
affordable. I imagine this is the case
across Latin America. I bet there's BYDs
and others all over the place. I also
know that you know, China has made a lot
of agriculture investments in Brazil
specifically and that there's a lot of
trade going on and maybe they're
probably going to buy more soybeans from
Brazil, etc. But on the other hand,
you know, you think about some of the
economic stagnation that say in Mexico
has experienced, it seems at least
plausible that part of it is the sort of
re-reshoring of industrial activity that
might have gone into Mexico going into
China instead. You know, there's this
conversation that happens in the US and
Europe. It's like, "Oh, is China going
to eat our industrial lunch across every
anything that we had strength in?" How
much is that conversation happening in
Latin America where it's like, "Okay,
maybe it's a good trading partner, etc.
buy cheap cars, but also this fear that
their industrial development is going to
be stymied in some way by the powerhouse
of You know, I remember I was at had a
cab driver in Mexico and he was
complaining that sombreros were made in
China now, etc. How much anxiety is
there around that? I think there's a lot
of anxiety. China is the one trade
partner for most of Latin America. Not
for Mexico, but for most of Latin
America. But China buys Latin American
commodities. They buy soy and pork from
Brazil. They buy copper and iron from
Chile and Peru. China buys commodities
and they push back cheap goods that
undermine any effort by Latin America to
move up the value chain. And in some
ways this is historical, right? This is
this is the model that Spain implemented
in Latin America in the colonial era.
It's how the United States treated Latin
America throughout the 20th century. And
in many ways China is just speed running
all of the errors that Spain and the
United States made, but in a much
shorter time frame across, you know, a
few decades in the 2000s now.
I think that Latin America has some real
concerns in terms of China
pushing cheap goods into Latin America
and not really providing the technology
transfers, not really providing the the
the skill sets necessary for Latin
America to boost its own economies. It's
I mean, it's fantastic for Chile's
economy that China buys all of this
copper. And yet Chile would much rather
sell China tech goods and and you know,
and so I think that there's a there's an
element here in which Latin America
knows that China
is necessary for its markets and Chinese
investment would So to go to a slightly
different point here, Chinese investment
in Latin America when they've gone to
and done infrastructure investment,
there have been failures in terms of the
dam that they built in Ecuador is full
of cracks.
And you know, when they go and they
invest in some of the construction
projects, they bring their own people
and so it doesn't necessarily provide as
many jobs for Latin America as it
should. So so Latin America definitely
sees the negative impacts of Chinese
investment. China's a reality. I mean,
China is going to be buying goods from
Latin America because Latin America
provides those goods and China is the
market. So so there's no way that China
doesn't interact with Latin America, but
figuring out how Latin America can have
more fair trade with China is incredibly
important for the region. And from the
US standpoint, we're not going to push
China away from Latin America. There
there's going to be a relationship
between China and Latin America, but we
should want a level playing field so
that Chinese companies can't bribe their
way into public contracts and that so
that Chinese infrastructure projects
don't undermine the region's
infrastructure and energy grids. And so
there there there are ways that we can
push for better behavior from China
without thinking that China's going to
be blocked out from the region.
I realize we mentioned Cuba at the top
of this conversation and we haven't
really dug into it very much, but
actually I just learned before we
started recording this episode that
you're a certified super forecaster. So
I feel like I should be asking you
questions in odds terms and
>> probabilities. Yeah.
>> [laughter]
>> All right, so odds on regime change in
Cuba.
So I would say odds that Cuba finds
itself aligned with the Trump
administration, which is a little
different than regime change, are close
to 70 to 80% right this moment, you
know, within the next 12 months. Now, I
think that the Trump administration will
want to see Diaz-Canel leave power
because they're very focused on the
person on the top and they're going to
head on a pike to to show that they got
some sort of what Trump would call
regime change. I don't think the Cuban
Communist Party is going away in this,
right? We're going to see a deal that's
very similar to Venezuela in which the
people who are empowering Cuba are
largely the same people who are in power
today, but they decide to work with the
Trump administration. One of the
long-term trajectories in Cuban history
here is the fact that Cuba has always
had a patron to help them to help rescue
them from US sanctions, right? So it was
the Soviet Union during the Cold War,
and it was Venezuela during the 2000s.
All of a sudden, the US is going to be
the savior for Cuba from US sanctions.
Um there there's Trump is using US
sanctions as a coercive tool to force
Cuba to cut a deal with the United
States, and arguably he's going to be
successful. This is a much easier
operation than Iran in many ways because
the Cuban regime is corrupt, and because
the Cuban regime, I think, is eager to
cut a deal to help rescue their economy
and make sure that they can maintain
power and they don't just preside over a
failing state. Milei, we haven't talked
about him. Has the libertarian miracle
happened? This is one of these things
where I don't I don't ever read on any
of this, but I see people who are like,
you know, hardcore Milei stans. They
say, "Look, inflation has absolutely
plunged." Which measures of inflation do
seem to have collapsed, and then you
have others say, "Oh, but it's cuz
they're just burning through their
reserve balances, and it's
unsustainable, etc. To my mind, you
know, setting aside inflation metrics,
the question is like, will Argentina
improve as like a place where people
want to invest and do business, which is
a
slightly adjacent, but what's your read
on the success of the Milei project?
Milei's being graded on a curve in the
sense that when he came into office,
inflation was 200%, and now inflation's
down to 30 to 35% That's pretty good.
>> It's good, but
>> Everything is relative.
>> But 35% inflation is insane, right? And
it means that you have no reason to save
money, and it's not despite some
predictions that it may get down to 20
or 25% this year. Given the straight of
Milei's crisis, we're much likelier to
be closer to 40 or 45% than we are to
25% by the end of this year.
Milei has managed over the course of the
past few months to increase foreign
reserves a little bit. He's gained, you
know, the past 4 months you've seen a
pop in foreign reserves, but that comes
from a an amazing agricultural season
that they've had.
>> Yeah, this is I mean, this is like what
I I want to get at, which is like, I'm
sure we could record hours and hours of
episodes on what is the deal with
Argentina, and I know there's a lot of
just What is it about Argentina's
economy that
What a weird situation. But setting all
that aside, I don't want to have that
debate right now. It's like
Whatever that pathology is that seems to
create all these issues that span
decades, has he changed the political
economy of the country in such a way
that it could resemble a sort of
moderately wealthy Latin American
economy that people aspire to be
towards? I think this is where politics
overrides economics in the sense that
Milei is reveling in the fact that he
lives in this polarized society, and he
gets to point at the Peronists, who are
the people who have crashed Argentina's
economy multiple times, as this big
threat. If the Peronists take power,
Argentina will crash again. You know,
and he's basing a lot of his political
support on how awful his opponents are.
Unfortunately, what investors fear is
the Peronists coming back to power. And
so Milei is hyping the one thing that
could cause Argentina to crash again. As
soon as, you know, the Tinkerbell effect
stops and people stop clapping and
believing in Milei and think that the
Peronists might come back to power,
Argentina's economy will crash. This is
what we saw in 2019 when Macri was
president, and then the Peronists
suddenly won a primary, all of a sudden
Argentina's economy plunged, and then
the Peronists managed to win because the
economy was bad. We could see a repeat
in 2027 of what we saw in 2019. Uh
Milei's popularity right now is below
35%. As soon as people think the
Peronists might come back to power,
it's not going to go well for
Argentina's economy. It means it's not
going to go well for Milei. Argentina
needs a sustainable economic agenda that
crosses political parties. As long as
everyone thinks, "Oh, this party could
be the party that saves Argentina, and
this is the party that destroys
Argentina," but we live in a political
pendulum that goes back and forth,
Argentina's economy is going [music] to
continue a boom-bust cycle. And so we
are in the boom part of a boom-bust
cycle right now, but nobody should
mistake that for not being part of
within that boom-bust cycle.
It's all democracy thing. I don't know.
It seems like a real problem.
Wherever you look, US too, it's like you
can't plan for anything. No, I'm joking.
I think democracy is a pretty good
system. Boss, thank you so much for
coming on Odd Lots. Big fan of [music]
your work, and really appreciate you
chatting with us.
>> Thank you so much for having me.
>> [music]
[music]
>> It is really weird, Tracy, like how
little attention, generally speaking,
Latin America always seems to get both
in sort of media and political discourse
in the US.
>> No, absolutely. And it's interesting, I
guess, to see that starting to change
now. I don't know. Like it's so hard to
talk about cuz you have to go on a sort
of country-by-country
>> I know. It feels like where do we start?
No, let's talk about Milei. What's up
with Lula? How's he doing? How's Yeah, I
know. I mean, the broad theme does seem
to be the Zorin shift, as Boss was
pointing out, and this idea of like
de-ossification of the entire region. I
still think there is a Don Rowe doctrine
in the sense that like Trump wants a lot
out of the region, and if he has to like
take it by direct ownership versus like
work out a specific deal with a leader,
like the outcome is kind of the same.
You know, I think the issue, and it's
somewhat related So obviously, there's,
you know, we all know it, there's
there's going to be at some point where
Trump isn't president, and no one knows
what the future holds beyond that. There
also is this broader thing, even if you
just look in US domestic politics, where
because there's a lot of paralysis in
American politics, you have a lot of
lawmaking essentially via presidential
orders or whatever, and then those can
immediately be ripped up on the very
next day. And so like, I do think like
there's this real issue of like durable
policy that expands beyond any president
both on the foreign policy realm, but
then also even on the domestic policy
realm, because like the idea of like,
what is the US aspire for its
relationship with Mexico to be like long
forward, strikes me at this point such
an abstraction beyond which I think US
politics is capable of seriously
discussing. Like the idea of like having
like a cogent framework that stands any
sort of test of time just seems like too
much of a lift for US politics right
now.
>> Well, I was also thinking it was
interesting when Boss was talking about
like having to apply sort of a
Venezuelan framework of political
analysis to the current Trump
administration, where you're going on a
person-by-person basis to try to
identify what each of them wants and who
holds the most power to actually make it
happen. Yeah, you know what it is? It's
sort of like, I think there's one way to
think about the Trump administration.
I'm going to sound like a chatbot where
it like brings where because it has a
memory of the user, it's going to bring
in something very arbitrary, but it
reminds it's a little bit like the pod
shop model, right? Where you have a lot
of different players, and they're sort
of
Right, and they're
and they're being they're allocated
political capital in real time based on
whether they have the hot hand, and
sometimes they get shown the door really
quickly. And some, you know, it's like
You hear these see these reports about
how like Bill Polley, the head of the
FHFA, is behind these subpoenas of
people on the FOMC. Why is this the
domain of the FHFA secretary? It's very
strange. It's a very odd situation, but
for at any given moment, someone in the
Trump orbit has that political capital
that they have been allocated. They're
perceived to have the hot hand or
whatever. Trump likes them, and so then
they get influence on all kinds of
things, and it feels like, I don't know
where I'm going with this, but it to
Boss's point, it's like what you really
do have to pay attention on the
member-by-member level because they are
rising in power and who has the
influence and who has the ear in a way
that does seem somewhat novel.
>> No, I I really like that analogy,
actually. And I guess the risk, like as
in any pod shop, is that people like
kind of go off and do their own thing
without an integrated risk management
system that kind of oversees all of it.
All right, shall we leave it there?
>> Let's leave it there. This has been
another episode of the Odd Lots podcast.
I'm Tracy Alloway. You can follow me at
Tracy Alloway. And I'm Joe Weisenthal.
You can follow me at the Stalwart.
Follow our guest, James Bosworth, aka
Boss. He's at Blogging is by Boss.
Definitely check out his newsletter,
Latin America Risk Report. Follow our
producers, Carmen Rodriguez at Carmen
Arman, Dash Bennett at Dash Bot, and
Kelly Brooks at Kelly Brooks. And for
more Odd Lots content, go to
Bloomberg.com/odd lots, where we have a
daily newsletter and all of our
episodes. And you can chat about all of
these topics 24/7 in our Discord,
discord.gg/odd
lots. And if you enjoy Odd Lots, if you
like it when we go [music] on tours of
Latin American politics, then please
leave us a positive review on your
favorite podcast platform.
>> [music]
>> And remember, if you are a Bloomberg
subscriber, you can listen to all of our
episodes absolutely ad-free. All you
need to do is find the Bloomberg channel
on Apple Podcasts and follow the
instructions [music] there. Thanks for
listening.
>> Ooh.
Ooh.
>> [singing]
[music]
>> Ooh.
Ooh.
>> [music]